+++
date = "2006-09-20T00:00:00+01:00"
description = "Nobody likes a website they cannot use. Usability, or making a site easy to use, is the holy grail of web design. It is impossible to please everyone but by taking sensible steps you can significantly improve the usability of your site. "
tags = ["Usability"]
title = "10 Steps to Improving Usability"
+++

## Simple standards based design

Firstly and most importantly you should design and build your website with Web
Standards at the fore. Amongst other things this will reduce download times,
improve search engine rankings, and future proof your content.

Whilst you want to have a visually appealing site, keep it simple. Most users
are not design junkies and just want to find information or buy a product. Focus
on a strong navigation and graphical elements that highlight the most important
parts of the site.

## A prominent search facility

A search is a simple means of quickly improving the usability of your site.
Within seconds of arriving at your site users can find information that may be
buried deep within your site. Providing an advanced search interface also allows
users to perform more detailed searches. Put the search in a prominent position
on your site either in the header or near to it.

## Breadcrumb trails

Showing users where they are in the structure of the site is a simple way to
allow users to navigate. A breadcrumb trail usually appears at the top of the
page about the main content and tells users which section of the site they are
in.

## Streamline Information Architecture

The Information Architecture, or Sitemap is an integral part of a successful
website. Construct a broad and shallow Sitemap and try to keep things to three
levels if at all possible. Think about what your users want and build the
Sitemap accordingly. You can test your assumptions by showing friends or
colleagues your primary navigation and asking where they would expect to find
things.

## Visual cues with icons

Icons are a great way of providing visual cues to specific tasks or features on
the site. You can purchase icons cheaply or make them yourself using Photoshop
or Illustrator. Keep icons small and quickly recognisable. Be obvious - if you
are making an icon for a search use visual language that is quickly associated
with searching.

## Focus on the major things users want

Typically your user base will be performing two or three tasks on your site.
This might be searching for information, buying products or engaging in a
discussion. If there is one thing that users do over and over again put it on
the Home Page in big letters. There is no shame in being obvious if it helps
users to get what they want more quickly.

## Assume the worst

Assume that your users are not sophisticated or technology-savvy. Make things
obvious for visitors. The more you hide things the more likely they are to leave
you site in frustration. Testing the site with older users may well show up some
obvious usability errors you have made in your design.

## Provide a link to the Home Page

any web designers think that a Home button is over-egging usability features.
After seeing many users struggle to get back to the Homepage on major websites I
recommend a link to the Homepage in the main navigation.

## Design the site for your audience not your ego

Users are the most important thing on your site. You can indulge a design fetish
or use the latest web technologies if you want to but do not lose perspective.
Users are why you are making your website so if it does not work for them there
is no point doing it.

## Learn from mistakes

Talk to users. They are the ones who define the success or otherwise of your
site. The web is not a static medium so things can be changed. If you find that
users are failing to find something or to perform a specific task then you
should amend things. You will save money by fixing a problem before it gets out
of hand.
