+++
date = "2006-10-11T00:00:00+01:00"
description = "Well written copy is often overlooked but is an integral part of a successful website. Here are 10 tips to tighten up your copy. "
tags = ["Copy"]
title = "10 Tips for Good Web Copy"
+++

## Keep it short

One of the most common mistakes of web copy is that it is too long. There have
been several [studies][1] showing people read a lot less on the web and will
leave a site if they cannot find what they are looking for. Pages that scroll
and scroll are unlikely to be read. Instead place a link to a downloadable .pdf
file.

## Use whitespace to your advantage

To accommodate for different reading practices use whitespace to delineate
sections or headings of content. Spacing content out will allow readers to
quickly scan through content to find what they are looking for.

## Use scannable headings

The practice of reading on the web is very different from traditional printed
matter. Users scan the page seeking what they are looking for in titles and
lists. For that reason it is a good idea to highlight sections and subsections
of the page using headings. This will allow the reader to quickly find what they
are looking for.

## Summarise long page content

Particularly in large information based sites a one to two sentence summary at
the top of the page is of great benefit to the user. They will quickly be able
to see if the page content is relevant to them.

## Combine lists and links

Ordered and unordered lists are a good way present copy on the web. They can
provide users with a concise and scannable list of options open to them.
Threading links to relevant content in your copy is also a good way to allow the
user to find information quickly.

## Icons enhance copy

Design elements can significantly increase the power of your copy. It is quicker
for a user to recognise a section of copy if there is an icon associated with
it. This also has advantages for users with cognitive difficulties who can use
the icons as a guide. Do not go overboard but when used discreetly icons can
improve your copy and the usability of your website as a whole.

## Make sure it is legible and printable

Good copy is useless without users being able to read it. Ensuring the text is
dark and on a white background is important. Make sure that users can resize the
text if they want to. For longer articles many readers will also want to print
off the article. Make sure you use a print stylesheet so that the copy formats
well when printed.

## Use the Semantics of XHTML

Understanding how XHTML works in terms of the markup can greatly inform your
content and search engines will love you for it. Putting some time into
understanding XHTML will allow you to structure your content for delivery on the
web. It makes sense for search engines but also for users who appreciate
structured copy.

## Do not point out the obvious

Avoid stating the obvious to users. "Click here" or "Follow this link" can be
replaced by linking a word within the content. Users understand that more
content is further down the page so you do not need to tell them to scroll down
for more in the copy.

## Focus on users

Finally and most importantly consider what users are looking for your site.
Generally there will be two or three key tasks that they want to perform.
Provide clear and concise copy to direct users to these tasks. Avoid lengthy
copy that focusses on the internal structure of the company. Generally users are
not interested in Executive Biographies so focus on the user and not the
internal mechanics of your company.

[1]: http://www.useit.com/alertbox/9710a.html
