+++
author = "George Ornbo"
date = "2011-10-18T10:25:00+01:00"
original = "http://pebblecode.com/blog/running-a-designer-trial/"
tags = []
title = "Running a designer trial"
+++

For the last two weeks we’ve been running a paid trial for the position of
Designer at pebble.code with [Mark Durrant](http://markdurrant.co.uk/) . Here’s
an outline of how we ran the trial.

### Two weeks

We had a tough time recruiting a junior-mid level designer. Typically
portfolio’s were non-existent and finding a designer who spoke the language of
web apps was difficult. We were looking for a designer with HTML/CSS skills too
which make it even more difficult. We then found Mark Durrant, a talented young
designer from Swindon. We were impressed enough by interviews and his work to
offer him a two week paid trial. Here’s one example from his portfolio:

![](https://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lq6jtcPhdy1qz7kgs.jpg)

We decided that running a two week trial was a good amount of time to really
test Mark’s capabilities and to run him through all of the skills that we were
looking for. As a web application business we were primarily looking for someone
to create UIs for our web apps, but also to have an overall design eye and
potentially to take ownership of the UX and Creative side of things.

### Identity design

The first task we gave Mark was to look at the identity design for pebble.code.
Prior to Mark arriving we had worked hard as a business to provide a tight
creative brief for the work and within an hour and half of arriving Mark was
straight into it. As much as testing his creative skill we wanted to test his
ability to present designs, receive feedback and to iterate designs.

By 3pm on Tuesday Mark had produced three concepts and presented them strongly
too.

![](https://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lq6jvdh2fI1qz7kgs.jpg)

We were immediately impressed. Feedback came for Mark in all forms. Sketches on
paper, verbal feedback and emails. We were looking for how Mark would manage
this feedback and it quickly became obvious he was skilled at pushing back where
he needed to but was able to respond quickly to feedback.

Mark was able to iterate the designs towards a workable identity and produced an
accompanying website design by the end of the week. We are likely to use the
branding and website that he produced so within the first week he had exceeded
our expectations.

![](https://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lq6icfHpEB1qz7kgs.png)

### Bread and butter

The first week had been a gentle introduction testing skills that we hoped would
be within Mark’s comfort zone. For the second week we wanted to focus more on
the day to day task that Mark would be expected to perform.

On the Monday we set Mark the task of redesigning a complex form from one of our
production web apps. Mark responded by thinking through the grouping of form
elements but without really changing the layout of the page or focussing on the
user experience. At last something he wasn’t good at!

Tuesday saw Mark redesigning Tricklr, one of our web apps. Tricklr is still in
production but allows users to trickle out tweets over time. Mark did a great
job here, really enhancing the existing design and proving his iconography on
the homepage.

![](https://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lq6i7uRO9X1qz7kgs.png)

On Wednesday we moved Mark onto some UX work, asking him to close Creative
Suite. We asked him to consider [ideapi](http://ideapi.com), one of our web
products and the user journeys involved in creating an idea. This was not a task
we were expecting him to perform well in but again he had thoroughly exceeded
our expectations.

We were impressed with how he went right back to basics, assessing the process
of how an idea is created on paper. He spoke the language of UX very well and
produced some good wireframes exploring a response to the problem.

![](https://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lq6iow8bIF1qz7kgs.jpg)

After some feedback Mark continued to work on this on Thursday and delivered
some impressive wireframes that gave us complete confidence he could deliver
this type of work to our clients.

### A strong trial

This was the first time we’ve undertaken this type of trial. We felt that for
the level we were looking for Mark had performed very well on all of the tasks.
There were certainly areas he can improve on but we were not looking for the
finished article.

As a business we felt completely confident in making Mark an offer and I think
the experience was a good one for Mark too. He was able to be exposed to all of
the skills that he’ll be using in the role within a safe sandbox. Hopefully
he’ll blog here about his experience of the trial too.

Based on the trial we have made Mark an offer and we are happy to say he has
accepted!
