+++
author = "George Ornbo"
date = "2013-11-29T12:53:00+00:00"
original = "http://pebblecode.com/blog/open-source-social-responsibility/"
tags = []
title = "Open Source Social Responsibility"
+++

Open Source Social Responsibility should be considered on a par with Corporate
Social Responsibility. Businesses that use and rely on Open Source software need
to play an active part in Open Source communities. If done correctly there can
be huge benefits for businesses that realise this.

### Open Source and Business

The perception of Open Source software amongst business leaders is clearly
changing. The historical suspicion that free software was somehow dangerous,
unstable and not enterprise ready has almost entirely eroded. Today major
corporations run Open Source software everywhere and major business functions
are totally reliant on it. With the pace of commerce it is often easy to forget
how Open Source software is created.

Often Open Source projects start with a single developer looking to solve a
problem. This might grow to two or three as the project grows but typically
these developers are solving their own problem and working under their own
steam. As a project grows users of the project will start making feature
requests, reporting bugs and perhaps even sending code to the projects.
Typically the creators of Open Source software do this in their own time at no
cost.

For businesses that rely on Open Source software the idea of being able to use
things for free is often seen as very attractive by management layers looking to
keep costs down. Clearly Open Source software will be less expensive than
licensed software but the idea that a business should consider it as free is
unsustainable for both the business and the creators of Open Source software.

Businesses should take responsibility for contributing back to Open Source and
it is relatively easy to become a responsible and active business member of an
Open Source community.

Here are a few ways that businesses can contribute and also benefit from
contributing.

### Developers working on Open Source

Open Source projects can directly affect client projects or a product. It might
be the case that a library does almost everything needed but not quite. This
scenario is the perfect opportunity to add the feature and send the project a
pull request. This is of huge benefit to Open Source projects as the community
on the project grows and additional features are added.

Allocating 10% of a developer’s time in a business for Open Source projects is
also a clear commitment if it is difficult to Open Source product or client
code.

### Sponsoring developers

Businesses that rely on a particular Open Source product often choose to sponsor
an entire project. The [Redis](http://redis.io/) project for example is
maintained by a single developer Salvatore ‘Antirez’ Sanfilippo.
[VMWare](http://www.vmware.com/) and now
[Pivotal Tracker](https://www.pivotaltracker.com/) have chosen to fund the
development of Redis. When products start to rely heavily on Open Source
projects it makes total sense for businesses to sponsor a product. When done
right the project maintains autonomy and the sponsoring business benefits from
the person that knows the most about the software being at their disposal.

### Sponsoring events

Open Source software is reliant on disparate individuals coming together to form
communities. Whilst much collaboration happens online there is no substitute for
face to face discussion and collaboration. Businesses often choose to sponsor
meetups or conferences to help facilitate this. For the business there is the
opportunity to increase goodwill amongst developer communities and even to aid
recruitment amongst a specific group of developers.

This is a great option for smaller businesses wanting to give something back to
communities. Sponsoring food or drinks at a small meetup can be a relatively
small amount.

### Creating Open Source Software

Inevitably using Open Source Software will only get you so far. Taking the view
that where possible software that you write for clients and projects should
always be Open Source is really positive for the community. It gives a business
a strong reputation within developer communities and if the library is picked up
by the community it is highly likely the project will start to receive patches
and new features. This is great for any products that lean on the library in the
long term.

### Sending speakers to conferences

Many software businesses have experts in their field. Allowing and encouraging
these experts to share their knowledge and encourage debate at conferences is an
excellent way to contribute to Open Source communities. Often the speaker will
find that assumptions are challenged or validated leading to a huge benefit for
the business. It shows engagement with communities as well as supporting
professional development for an individual.

### GitTips

[Gittips](https://www.gittip.com/) allows developers to receive micro-payments
for Open Source projects that they are working on. The service allows businesses
or individuals to send money directly to developers. It is a simple way to
support Open Source projects.

### Cash

Cold, hard cash is the least imaginative way to support Open Source but there
are a number of projects that reach out with requests for cash. Recently
[npm](https://npmjs.org/) and [nodejitsu](https://www.nodejitsu.com/) have
started a campaign to raise [$20,000 to scale npm](https://scalenpm.org/). These
projects deserve support from businesses that rely on critical Open Source
infrastructure.

Transparency around these projects can be a little opaque though. Where does
this money go? Who is working on it? What is it going to deliver?

### Conclusion

A lot is made of Corporate Social Responsibility. I’d like to argue that any
business that relies and uses Open Source software has an Open Source
Responsibility.

This can be achieved in a number of ways whether it be man hours, resources,
sponsorship, altruism or just plain hard cash. The most important thing is for
businesses to realise that this is a responsibility and that with a little
thought everyone benefits.
