+++
author = "George Ornbo"
date = "2013-10-21T21:23:10+01:00"
original = "http://pebblecode.com/blog/winning-new-business-with-hack-days/"
tags = ["hacks"]
title = "Winning new business with Hack Days"
+++

Hack Days are a central part of pebble {code}’s culture. About every three
months everyone at the company stops working on client work for a day and
participates in a Hack Day. The theme for the day is given out a few days in
advance giving designers and developers the chance to think about what they
would like to work on. Previous themes have been ‘The Olympics’, 'Art’ and
'Games’. Some of the projects created on these hack days can been seen on the
[Labs](http://pebblecode.com/labs) page.

Hack Days give developers the chance to explore a new technology, collaborate
with people from other teams and most importantly the chance to play. Hack Days
are a great experience. There is a frenzy of creative energy and at the end of
the day each project shows what they have created over a few beers. Normally
about four or five different technologies have been used. In essence the day
exists for itself but often developers take what they have learned during the
day back into their projects or even take their hack forward.

Recently we invited a potential client to see how we worked by being part of a
Hack Day. The client is a FTSE 100 company based in the UK. We felt a hack day
would show our culture and skills more effectively than a long proposal
document. The cost to company was relatively high (the whole company worked on
it) but we decided that even if the contract did not convert it would still be a
positive exercise for us as a company.

The client got the chance to meet our team, explore our skill set and experience
the creativity and innovation in the team first hand. For two days they saw us
at work and at play. The theme for the day was related to the client’s problem
but not over-prescriptive.

There were some concerns that the exercise would simply be like client work with
the potential client directing what they wanted. But it wasn’t like that. The
client team engaged in the Hack Day like anyone else creating ideas and helping
to develop others. Ideas flowed. Whiteboards were covered. Software was created.
At the end of the day we shared a beer.

We won the contract, developers and designers enjoyed it and two of the hacks
were taken forward to form the basis for what was eventually delivered to the
client. It dawned on us that we had won new business by doing something we loved
doing. We didn’t have to spend days responding to an RFP, producing long
proposal documents or attending endless meetings. We simply exposed our culture
and showed them what we could do.

The feedback that we received from the client was that they really enjoyed the
fact that we had thrown open the company for them. They got to see everything
about us. The creativity within the team had really impressed them and the hacks
had made them look at their problem in a different way.

Moving forward we intend to repeat the exercise if we feel a prospective client
is the right fit. It was a positive experience for all involved.
