+++
author = "George Ornbo"
date = "2015-02-09T12:37:00+00:00"
original = "http://pebblecode.com/blog/book-review-the-second-machine-age/"
tags = []
title = "Book Review: The Second Machine Age"
+++

In [The Second Machine Age](http://www.secondmachineage.com/) Erik Brynjolfsson
and Andrew McAfee eloquently document many of the changes that increased
Artificial Intelligence is bringing. They go on to make a series of policy
recommendations that, whether you agree with them or not, will educate you
further about the economic and social changes that increased Artificial
Intelligence will bring.

## Artificial Intelligence - the present and future

The Second Machine Age begins by documenting many of the changes that are
happening to economics and society as a result of increased automation. Through
examples of computers beating humans at Jeopardy!, unbeatable chess computers
and cars that can drive themselves Brynjolfsson and McAfee demonstrate that the
world is changing and will change radically over the years to come. The book is
ambitious in that it initially seeks to document the impact of automation mostly
through third-party research, theorise about the future impact of Artificial
Intelligence and then make policy recommendations for legislators.

The book draws on a large body of academic research and cites several studies
around the impact of Artificial Intelligence. It is not exploring what is
possible, but rather showing (and sometimes in wonder) what AI is capable of.
This includes boyish excitement of being driven around in a car with no driver
or celebrating that Watson can beat humans at Jeopardy! every time. There is
some reflection and analysis given to the social and economic impact of AI
during these examples but predemoninantly the initial chapters of the book can
be summarised by “this is what’s happening, it is amazing, and we’ll need to
work out how to deal with it”.

## Productivity Challenged

Historically GDP has measured a country’s productivity and to a large extent
continues to do. GDP is inherently labour based and the idea that a nation’s
standard of living equates to GDP output still governs much of how the world is
run. The book points out that because of digitisation and automation this is
becoming increasingly less relevant and it is no longer the best way to measure
growth.

> Production in the second machine age depends less on physical equipment and
> structures and more on the four categories of intangible assets: intellectual
> property, organizational capital, user-generated content and human capital.

The authors suggest using consumer surplus to determine growth because it offers
a better representation of improvements in quality of life as well as monetary
growth. Many new technologies are free to users, such as Google, Wikipedia, and
many digital technologies which drastically improve quality of life but are not
accurately reflected in GDP numbers. This was a really interesting section of
the book and effectively challenges many of the ways that we measure
productivity and ultimately human happiness.

## Reflection on Wealth

The authors reflect that far from the vision of a distributed, egalitarian
platform the web has increased the gap between rich and poor. The cause of this
is suggested to be a result of both digitisation and globalisation. The book
notes that the top 1% of earners in the USA have seen large increases to their
income whilst the lowest earners have seen their earnings decrease. The authors
cite the example of digital music where more music is being listened to more
than ever but artists have seeen a dramatic drop in revenue income. While it now
costs almost nothing for distributors to sell digital music the music industry
has had to accept that the new distributors like Spotify and Google Music will
take a greater cut of the overall revenue pie and that record labels and artists
will get less.

The authors describe this as bounty and spread, where distributors or technology
providers command a bounty for having understood how to solve a particular
problem but relatively everyone else’s economic position in the problem will
decrease.

## Human Jobs will be automated

The book points out the inevitable truth that advances in AI will result in job
losses. The example given in the book is of professionals that prepare tax
returns. Software is already largely automating this task and it is cheaper and
more efficient for the buyers of this service to use software services.

> If you can give precise instructions to someone else on exactly what needs to
> be done, you can often write a precise computer program to do the same task.
> In other words offshoring is often only a way station on the road to
> automation.

In a largely utopian view the book’s authors urge legislators to let AI and net
effects like this to happen. The underlying message of the book encouraging
humanity to run with machine rather than to fear it.

The book seems to position itself in a space that welcomes the advances that AI
can bring to humanity but is acutely aware of the need to create regulatory and
legislative environments for it to flourish. Indeed there are two entire
chapters devoted to Policy Recommendations and Long-Term Recommendations. These
recommendations support the underlying conclusion of the book that humans should
focus on skills that compliment machines. They should not seek to fight
automation and moreover the authors are hugely optimistic about what increased
AI can bring. The most telling example in the book is of human chess players
being able to beat a chess supercomputer with the support of an average chess
computer. The authors see that combining the human consciousness with Artificial
Intelligence can propel intelligence beyond what can be achieved without it. Far
from running from machines the book recommends we should embrace Artificial
Intelligence and recognise it as a compliment to our own human abilities.

Whether you agree with the liberal message to encouraging Artificial
Intelligence and letting it run its course the book raises many issues that
Technologists, Academics and Legislators should be considering. This book is not
the only book to do this but if you are looking for a book to challenge your
social and economic assumptions on Artificial Intelligence the book achieves
well.
