+++
author = "George Ornbo"
date = "2016-07-01T00:00:00Z"
description = "The time when startups had an uncontested market for their idea is mostly over. In the winner takes all economy how you execute your idea is everything."
original = "http://pebblecode.com/blog/how-you-execute-an-idea-is-everything/"
tags = ["Opinion"]
title = "How you execute an idea is everything"
+++

## Ideas are cheap

There was a time when Internet ideas were extremely valuable. Entrepreneurs
guarded them with close secrecy and wrapped NDAs around even whispering about
them. Today ideas are shared all the time. If you work in tech it is likely
friends and family will say 'I've got this great idea for an app!' and start to
tell you about it. The recent trend for me has been people pitching the idea 'It
is like Uber for x'. These ideas typically embody some kind of marketplace for
buyers and sellers and offer an element of disintermediation or service
delivery. Many are entering markets that have digital incumbents whether it be
in food delivery, music streaming or humans for hire platforms.

## Execution is hard

Let's consider food delivery as an Internet business. It has a good revenue
model. By matching buyers and sellers and providing an effective marketplace it
can charge levies on transactions. If the volume of trades is high enough there
is a viable business. Furthermore it is very scalable. You just need to recruit
more restaurants and delivery drivers who potentially you don't even need to
employ.

The problem though is that the barriers to entry for this type of business are
relatively low. Whilst the technology part of the business is non-trivial it
does not need CERN scientists to build it. This results in a number of
businesses in the market and in the food delivery sector there are already
multiple players. This is great for consumers and the open market but represents
a serious challenge to startups looking to establish themselves. With the
general pattern of one product rising to the top there is a high chance of
failure in the medium term if execution does not result in being the best
product in the market.

## The Winner Takes It All

The Internet Economy has seen the emergence of a [Winner Takes All market][1].
Consider Uber as an example. A number of entrepreneurs saw the opportunity that
Uber did and in London alone there were five different services operating before
Uber landed. Well funded, with a great product and effective marketing Uber
quickly established in London and started to dominate. Now the standard phrase
on a Friday night is not 'let's hail a cab' but instead is 'let's get an Uber'.
As Uber continues to refine and innovate on the product it continues to stay
ahead.

The same thing is true for a number of other sectors within Tech. Facebook won
at social media, Spotify at music streaming, Netflix at video streaming. Once a
product is established and has an effective product team behind it it becomes
very hard to dislodge without simply acquiring it. Furthermore competition now
comes from global businesses that have vast resources and funding. With Internet
business models being highly transferable there is a high chance an Internet
startup can be disrupted by an overseas competitor moving into the market.

## Old rules apply

An indication of the maturity of the Internet Economy is the choice that
consumers have for different product offerings. When the vacuum cleaner was
invented by Henry Cecil Booth in 1901 there was a brief period where there was
no competition. Quickly though the idea of a vacumn cleaner became a commodity
and the value became the product rather than the invention. I consider a similar
pattern has happened with many products in the Internet Economy.

So how do you compete? Typically products compete on cost and quality. Let's
consider streaming music services again. Most offer the same service of a vast
catalogue of music that you can listen to on-demand in return for a subscription
fee of Â£10 a month. Some stream at slightly higher bitrates but broadly the
service is the same. For music streaming this has resulted in products
developing features like offline listening and playlists but in essence the
service is still very similar. Without a doubt marketing plays a role in
recruiting customers but with just a month of loyalty in the offing customers
can quickly switch to another service.

Simply put to win products must create a winning customer experience. This
involves investing in user research, excellent product design and striving for
the best possible quality of product.

## Conclusion

The Internet Economy is maturing and we are seeing intense competition in
product businesses. For investors and entrepreneurs the winner takes all economy
means that an already risky exercise is made even more risky. As digital
businesses mature old rules of economics start to apply again. The customer is
king and striving for the best possible product is key. We have shifted from a
time where startup ideas were valuable to becoming ubiquitous and cheap.

A symptom of the maturing Internet economy is that the execution of the idea has
become the most valuable part.

[1]:
  http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/in-silicon-valley-now-its-almost-always-winner-takes-all
